#summary Setting VMC and DMC parameters for a run

= VMC Optimisation =

One way to set the number of samples for an optimisation is as follows,

{{{
<parameter name="blocks">50</parameter>
<parameter name="stepsbetweensamples">8</parameter>
<parameter name="walkersperthread">1</parameter>   
<parameter name="samples">200000</parameter>
}}}

 * blocks = number of lines in the scalar.dat file.
 * stepsbetweensamples = how often to dump configurations.
 * walkersperthread = walkers per thread (defaults to 1).
 * samples = number of samples to optimize on, this is across all nodes and threads.

= VMC to DMC Run =

One way to set the parameters for a VMC run leading up to a DMC run is

{{{ 
<parameter name="blocks">50</parameter>
<parameter name="steps">15000</parameter>
<parameter name="samples">10000</parameter>
<parameter name="walkers">4</parameter>
}}}

 * steps = number of steps each block
 * blocks = number of times to repeat steps (total steps for each walker is blocks x steps).
 * walkers = number of walkers on each node. default is one walker per thread.
 * samples = target number of walkers for the following DMC run. This is a global quantity across all nodes and threads.

Another way to set this is,

{{{ 
<parameter name="blocks">50</parameter>
<parameter name="steps">15000</parameter>
<parameter name="samples">10000</parameter>
<parameter name="fractionaldeficit">0.8</parameter>
<parameter name="walkers">4</parameter>
}}}

 * fractionaldeficit = choose the number of samples so there is not an integer number of samples per thread. This might allow for less wasted time in the case of a fluctuating population. 0.0 <= fractionaldeficit < 1. This rounds the number of samples down to an even integer then adds the correct amount to get the desired imbalance.

= Other useful parameters =
Some other things you might find useful to put in your VMC and DMC blocks.
== VMC ==
== DMC ==
{{{
<parameter name="MaxAge"> 2 </parameter>
<parameter name="nonlocalmoves"> no </parameter>
<parameter name="fastgrad">yes</parameter>
<parameter name="MaxCopy"> 2 </parameter>
<parameter name="feedback">5.0e-1</parameter>
}}}
 * MaxAge = the maximum number of times a walker can have a rejected move without reducing the probability to survive to the next step.
 * nonlocalmoves = T-moves of Casula. default is no.
 * fastgrad = default is yes. Might choose no for debugging?
 * MaxCopy = maximum number of children a walker can spawn at each step.
 * feedback = feedback parameter for adjusting trial energy. default = 1 (adjusted for tau).